---
description: （Data Structures and Algorithms in JAVA 6th Edition)
---

# 8.1.2 The Tree Abstract Data Type

We define a **tree** ADT using the concept of a _**position**_ as an abstraction for a node of a tree.

An element is stored at each position, and positions satisfy parent-child relationships that define the tree structure. A position object for a tree supports the method:

* `getElement():` Returns the element stored at this position.
* `root():` Returns the position of the root of the tree \(or null if empty\).
* `parent(p):` Returns the position of the parent of position p \(or null if p is the root\).
* `children(p):`  Returns an iterable collection containing the children of position p \(if any\).
* `numChildren(p):` Returns the number of children of position p.
* `isInternal(p):` Returns true if position p has at least one child.
* `isExternal(p):` Returns true if position p does not have any children. 
* `isRoot(p):` Returns true if position p is the root of the tree.
* `size():` Returns the number of positions \(and hence elements\) that are contained in the tree.
* `isEmpty():` Returns true if the tree does not contain any positions \(and thus no elements\).
* `iterator():` Returns an iterator for all elements in the tree \(so that the tree itself is Iterable\).
* `positions():` Returns an iterable collection of all positions of the tree.

### A Tree Interface in JAVA

Formalize the **Tree ADT** by defining the **Tree interface** in Java. We rely upon the same definition of the **Position interface.**

{% code title="An interface for a tree where nodes can have an arbitrary number of children." %}
```java
public interface Tree<E> extends Iterable<E> {
  Position<E> root();
  Position<E> parent(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException; 
  Iterable<Position<E>> children(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException;
  int numChildren(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException;
  boolean isInternal(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException; 
  boolean isExternal(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException; 
  boolean isRoot(Position<E> p) throws IllegalArgumentException; 
  int size();
  boolean isEmpty();
  Iterator<E> iterator(); 
  Iterable<Position<E>> positions();
}
```
{% endcode %}

### An AbstractTree Base Class in Java







